> **[Wellingtons-Sieg, oder die Schlacht bey Vittoria (Wellington's
> Victory, or the Battle of Vittoria), Op. 91 (1813)]{.smallcaps}**
>
> **Version I for Panharmonikon (1813)**
>
> **Version II for Orchestra (1813)**
>
> **History**

Paris had always been active regarding the so-called "Opera scene," with
the Bonn National theater relying for its repertoire mainly on comic
operas translated from the French. In the then contemporary Bonn
society, sympathy with the French Revolution was extreme, and as a
result, the flavor of the French Revolutionary march is present in many
of Beethoven's symphonic allegros.

*Wellington\'s Sieg, oder Die Schlacht bey Vittoria* was composed 1813,
premiered in Vienna on the 8^th^ of December 1813 and conducted by
Beethoven. It was dedicated to George Augustus Frederick (1762-1830),
the Prince Regent, later King George IV and King of Hanover. The
military-type instrumentation calls for piccolo, two flutes, two oboes,
two clarinets, two bassoons, four horns, six trumpets, three trombones,
timpani, three "canon-like" bass drums, two side drums, cymbals,
triangle, ratchets[^1], and strings. Taking about fifteen minutes, it is
of short duration. To the finale of that program, Beethoven added the
premiere of his 7^th^ Symphony.

The story revolves around the significant setback suffered by the French
in the war for the Iberian Peninsula (1807-14). Occasioned by the
British victory over Joseph Napoleon's troops near the Basque town of
Vitoria on 21 June 1813, it was a considerable triumph for General
Arthur Wellesley, who would soon have the title of Duke of Wellington
conferred on him. Beethoven created this "battle symphony," a favorite
genre in those times, in which a band of musicians recreates the drama
of a specific military combat.

*Wellingtons Sieg* was initially inspired for performance on a
bellows-driven invention by a friend of Beethoven, Johann Nepomuk Mälzel
(1776 -- 1838). The *panharmonikon* (a mechanical organ) could imitate
percussion and wind instruments,[^2] and the score for which Beethoven
harmonized Mälzel's sketches of a *Siegessymphonie* were to be engraved
for use on the machine.[^3] Impressed by the result, Mälzel asked
Beethoven to arrange the piece for orchestra, an idea Beethoven claimed
to have already considered.[^4] Upon agreement, Beethoven augmented the
work for orchestra with the addition of "battle-music." The composer and
inventor then planned for a premier at a benefit concert ostensibly to
support wounded Austrian and Bavarian soldiers who fought in the battle
of Hanau. After the enormously successful performances of *Wellingtons
Sieg*, Beethoven issued a "Letter of Thanks,"[^5] recognizing Mälzel for
all his efforts in making the arrangements for the concert. These
feelings of goodwill were short-lived, however: Beethoven soon
discovered that Mälzel claimed exclusive ownership of the orchestration,
had failed to mention Beethoven even once in the concert bills that were
distributed, and surreptitiously arranged to have a mechanical version
performed in Munich, with plans to tour additionally with his spurious
version of the work to Frankfort and London.[^6] The dispute resulted in
a unpleasant rift between the two. However, the bad feelings were not
permanent because in later years Beethoven promoted Mälzel's metronome
and what he believed were the significant contributions it made to
musical performance.[^7]

> **Analysis**

**Movements/Sections for Orchestra, 2 parts:**

> Part I. Schlacht
>
> Marcia. Rûle Britania (E♭ major)
>
> Marcia. Marlborough (C major)
>
> Schlacht - Allegro (B major)
>
> Sturm-Marsch. Allegro assai
>
> Part II. Sieges-Symphonie
>
> Intrada - Allegro ma non troppo (D major)

The first section, *Allegro con brio*, comprises of five separate motifs
of varying characteristics but all resemble the dazzling pomp and
ceremony of a victory procession. The English go into battle announced
by drums and trumpets, the 'God Save the King' as a march. Immediately
the French appear announced by drums and trumpets, follwed by a
*'Marlborough s'en va-t-en Guerre' -* 'God Save the King' as a
march.[^8] Next comes the challenge and counter challenge followed by
the tremendous battle proper, a storming march followed by the a few
bars of 'God Save the King' in a minor to signpost the defeat of the
French with a *"tremulous ending."* [^9]

The Wellington\'s Sieg, oder Die Schlacht bei Vittoria (Wellington's
Victory) commences with a snare drum crescendo, concluding in a trumpet
fanfare, announcing the arrival of the British forces.

Within the context of this composition, commemorating the decisive
Allied victory that severed Napoleon Bonaparte's control of Spain during
the Battle of Vitoria on June 21, 1813[^10], the piccolo serves two
functions throughout the breathtaking fourteen-minute 'potboiler.'[^11]
Firstly, led by the woodwinds and horns as the primary voices in stating
the opposing march melodies of *Rule, Britannia!* (representing the
British forces under General Arthur Wellesley, venerated with the title
of 1^st^ Duke of Wellington), and *Marlbrough s'en va-t-en Guerre*
(symbolizing the French army under King Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's
brother). Secondly, it is to be the shrill doubling for a majority of
the thematic material that developed the *Schlacht* (including the
*Sturm-Marsch* included in the first half) and *Sieges Sinfonie*.[^12]
Victory is perhaps Beethoven\'s most programmatic piece and, as the
subject matter of the composition suggests, the piccolo\'s main role is
to add a quality of militarism to the marches.

Following This "British" introduction is followed by the drums and
trumpets of the French, and an ensuing ^6^ march which is labeled in
the score as the French *"Marlbrough s'en va-t-en Guerre,"* better known
today as *"For He is a Jolly Good Fellow."*

The French sound a "battle" trumpet, which is answered by the English,
and after that, the battle music begins. Beethoven required the bass
drums to represent cannons, and ratchets to mimic intensified gunfire in
the score. The massive final onslaught of the British ends with the
pathetic sound of the defeated French staggering away to the tune of
*"Marlbrough*."

In the final movement, the *"Victory Symphony"* is heard. It is the
unique triumphant archetypical music Beethoven is so profound at
creating and is then followed up by an almost anti-climactic gentle
declaration of *"God Save the King."* The conclusion leading to the
final celebration follows a few variations on *God Save the King*,
including bars of alternating *piano* and *fortissimo*.[^13]

True to form, the opening leaves nothing to the imagination of the
listener, sounding off with the snare drum rhythms and trumpet fanfare
(in E-flat) of the 'English' combatants. The *Marcia: Rûle Britania*
commences, the piccolo and first-clarinet leading the anthem starting at
*piano* from the top of the accompanying military wind band, featuring
the 'Turkish' instrumentation of the triangle, cymbals and bass drum
(Bar 1 to 8 -Figure 221).

Not to say that Beethoven was necessarily implying that this or any of
the subsequent material in *Wellingtons Sieg* held any footing on the
'Turkish music' genre. Stephen Rumph states that "Janissary instruments
(bass drum, cymbals, and triangle) had long served as a standard battery
for European military bands" and that "he \[Beethoven\] relied on the
*banda Turca* every time he wanted to portray a realistic military mand,
whether the nationality was Bohemian, Polish, Scottish, Austrian,
English, or French (Rumph)."[^14] Achieving the closest aural depiction
of the Orient was executed not just with the representation of those
instruments that coincide with those cultural traditions, but rather
through the implementation of "harmonic and melodic exotica." Witness
this with Beethoven's use of "pedal points, modal harmonies, and
coloristic grace notes" for the Janissary militaristic and "vulgar"
procession of *Die Ruinen von Athen.*[^15]

![](media/image6.png){width="5.4421380139982505in"
height="3.741991469816273in"}

**Figure** **221: Wellington's Sieg, Marcia: Rûle Britania Bars 1 -
9**[^16]

> **Part I. Schlacht**
>
> **Marcia: Rûle Britannia**

Remaining within the parameters of the first and second octaves, it is
understood that Beethoven uses this particular model of function for the
piccolo to serve as an accessible melodic voice, the demands of which
cannot be sufficiently or appropriately met in its more brazen, piercing
tessitura of the third octave. Hence, even during the final eight bars
of the 'chorus', which emerged from a gradual crescendo poco a poco over
the ensuing fifteen bars preceding its forte entrance (Bar 8 to 22 -
Figure 221; Figure 222; Figure 223), the piccolo endures in contentment
as a servant to the overall tutti texture when the strings finally join
the military band to conclude the British march (Bar 23 to 30 - Figure
223).

![A close up of a device Description generated with very high
confidence](media/image7.png){width="5.657671697287839in"
height="0.49236111111111114in"}

**Figure** **222:Rûle Britannia, Piccolo Bars 10 -- 19**[^17]

![A close up of a piece of paper Description generated with high
confidence](media/image8.png){width="5.686111111111111in"
height="3.327777777777778in"}

**Figure** **223: Rûle Britannia Bars 20 -- 30**

Completing the image of opposing forces -- a notion that Rumph (Rumph)
champions[^18], suggesting that Beethoven demonstrates a metaphysical
expansion of such in a carefully constructed framework belied by the
composition's bombastic visage -- the 'French' side conducts its own
characteristic drumroll and trumpet fanfare (in C). At this point, the
military wind band, now joined by the flutes and oboes, lilts into its
compound duple meter chiming of the *Marcia: Marlborough.*

> **Marcia: Marlborough**

![](media/image9.png){width="5.440277777777778in"
height="1.8888888888888888in"}Unlike the more thematically diverse tune
of *Rule, Britannia!,* Beethoven essentially states the eight bars that
define the essence of *Marlborough* (Bars 1 to 8 -Figure 224),
intervenes with a basic refrain in the median (modulating briefly to E
Minor, Bars 9 to 12 -Figure 225), and follows by the reiteration of the
eight-bar folk tune (Bar 13 to 20 -Figure 225).

**Figure** **224: Marlborough Bars 1 -- 7**[^19]

![](media/image10.png){width="5.4625in" height="3.808333333333333in"}

**Figure** **225: Marlborough; Piccolo Bars 8 - 34**[^20]

He then repeats the entire cycle once more with the addition of the
string orchestra to the wind band with an almost gaudy resolution in the
last two bars of the march (Bar 21 to 43 - Figure 226). While it may
seem longer than the British introduction, Beethoven essentially takes a
jab at the French in composing a march that goes in circles. Again, the
piccolo is reserved in nature, as its obligation lies in chirping out
the melody with the oboes and clarinets.

![](media/image11.png){width="5.490277777777778in"
height="2.063888888888889in"}

**Figure** **226: Marlborough Bars 35 -- 43**[^21]

> **Schlacht (Battle)**

After the French and English trumpets each resound their calls to war,
the 'Battle' ensues, erupting into a shocking B Major cacophony of
pedals chords among the winds, brass, and low strings. There is also a
cascading of scales in the first violins, the intermittent blasts of
'cannon-fire' and rifle-like crackling of ratchets from the opposing
sides, and the distinctive trumpets rallying the troops to surge further
into the gruesome debacle. In the percussion section one percussionist
plays the timpani, while the other three percussionists play cymbals,
bass drum and triangle. Separated on stage are two \'sides\', British
and French, both playing the same instruments: two side drums called the
englisches and französisches Trommeln in the score. There are two bass
drums (Kanone \[Cannons\] in the score) one for each army, and two
ratchets for each side. Of note above the piccolo line is the
instruction for the bass drum "canons": Kanonen an der englischen Seite
-- marked ; Kanonen an der französischen Seite -- marked 0. The English
Trumpets and Trombones are in Eb and the French Trumpets and Trombones
are in C. The music appears to simulate approaching opposing armies with
extended passages depicting scenes of battle.

The piccolo is active from Bars 17 to 33 (Figure 227: Wellington Sieg,
Schlacht, Bars 16 - 20 and Figure 228), joining in the blocks of chords
in the wind band, serving various harmonic functions relative to the
spiraling chromatic and diatonic descent of the bassline since the
tonality shifted to the mediatory tonality of C Minor. Keeping to notes
in the third octave reminiscent in pitch to those it implemented during
the Sturm of Beethoven's Sixth Symphony (Symphony No. 6 in F major
(\"Sinfonia Pastoral\"), Opus 68, 4th Movement (Allegro) "Gewitter.
Sturm." -- \[1804-08\]: page 182), the piccolo here represents the
trenchant grip of terror of battle where it is any man's game. From Bars
30 to 33 (Figure 229), the piccolo breaks loose from the woodwinds and
joins the first violins in jetting sixteenth-note streaks upward in C
Major, resembling the screaming whistling of bolstered artillery and
gunfire from the French.

![](media/image12.png){width="5.48125in" height="1.738888888888889in"}

**Figure** **227: Wellington Sieg, Schlacht, Bars 16 - 20**[^22]

> ![](media/image13.png){width="5.525in" height="1.2909722222222222in"}

![](media/image14.png){width="5.5256944444444445in"
height="2.15740813648294in"}**Figure** **228:Wellington Sieg Schlacht
Piccolo Bars 21 -- 30**[^23]

**Figure** **229:Wellington Sieg Schlacht Piccolo and Strings Bars 31 --
37**[^24]

The texture then enters into a ^3^ *Meno Allegro* section, the French
trumpets blaring the rhythm the *Marlborough* march and showing a
glimpse of French dominance at this stage of the battle (Bar 33[^25]).
From this point until the *Sturm-Marsch* from Bar 127, the piccolo
remains silent, and by doing so implicates its partisan nature towards
support for the British.

> **Sturm-Marsch**

After wave upon wave of volleying chords and arpeggios, splattering a
frontispiece of the French in their most desperate of attempts to hold
the invading British forces at bay, the latter finally break through the
former's defenses. The break-through is signaled by the drastic shift to
A-flat Major, the amplified strumming of English snare rhythms now
coming from the French side, and whipping grace note figures in the
strings. Seizing upon the opportunity of parading a final onslaught
wrought by Wellington's allied forces, the piccolo cheeps its way back
into a more positive sentiment, climbing its way in octaves with the
flutes up the scale and breaks barriers in a chromatic modulation to its
top A-natural, signaling an A major key change in Bar 139 (Figure 230:
Sturm Bars 135 - 141).

![](media/image15.png){width="5.465277777777778in"
height="0.6574081364829396in"}

**Figure** **230: Sturm Bars 135 - 141**[^26]

It is from here that the piccolo, along with the other winds and
strings, winds up the texture with various grace notes, triplet
sixteenth notes and pedal harmonies every eight bars in exhilarating
chromatic shifts in tonality (A-flat Major -- A Major -- B-flat Major --
B Major). The chromatic tonality shifts are symbolizing the rising
fervor of the British forces as they descend upon the diminishing ranks
of the French. A brief four-bar interlude in the starting key of B Major
gives way to the key signature of E-flat Major in Bar 159 (Figure 231).

![](media/image16.png){width="5.4625in" height="0.8055555555555556in"}

**Figure** **231: Sturm Bars 156 - 163**[^27]

However, there is still tension within the rapidly-altering harmonic
shades within its parameters until it begins to lean for resolution in
the jolting bars under *Sempre più Allegro* from Bar 163 to 168.
Invoking the concept *of ' the last straw that overloads the
camel'*[^28] in the decimation of the French forces, the orchestra
bursts forth flying the banners of the victorious English starting at
the *Presto* of bar 169, heralding regal intervals of fourths and
rhythmic patterns and phrasings that will ultimately dominate the
composition during the impending *Siegessinfonie* (Figure 232)*. *

![](media/image17.png){width="5.4625in" height="0.6138888888888889in"}

**Figure** **232: Sturm Bars 164 - 171**[^29]

The piccolo adorns its robes of comradery and plays in homophony with
the rest of the ensemble. At Bar 187, the perspective shifts from the
victorious Allies to the growing panic and confusion of the French in
their full retreat (Figure 233).

![](media/image18.png){width="5.509027777777778in"
height="0.6201388888888889in"}

**Figure** **233: Sturm Bars 180 - 187**[^30]

The syncopated idioms of slurred *sforzando* triplet quarter notes
coupled with *fortississimo* () 'screams' from the piccolo, winds, and
brass (introducing the mighty roars of the trombones, Bars 217 to 224)
ring the ears of the audience with the horror of a scrambling,
slaughtered French army in the setting of the deciding key signature, D
Major, that will host the *Siegessinfonie* (Figure 234).

![](media/image19.png){width="5.466666666666667in" height="1.2in"}

**Figure** **234: Sturm Bars 214 - 230**[^31]

From Bar 245, the orchestra gradually dies down in volume, the first
violins guiding the rest of the textures down doubled-eighth-note
scales, the triplet motifs becoming fewer and farther in between (the
piccolo having silenced itself at Bar 244 - Figure 235), and the hushing
of gun and cannon fire.

![](media/image20.png){width="5.466666666666667in"
height="0.7222222222222222in"}In a sulking, pitiful state at Bar 273,
the **^6^** time signature is reintroduced, and we hear a deathly,
unanimated version of the *Marlborough* march in F-sharp minor as the
defeated French groggily limp off the battlefield (Figure 235).

**Figure** **235: Sturm Bars 240 - 245**[^32]

The last shots of British cannon fire and *pianississimo* (******)
*pizzicato* string and select woodwind chords gently hammer the last
nail into the French coffin.

Oblivious to the recent, pathetic plight of the capitulated French
forces, the *Sieges Sinfonie* explodes in D Major, a quartet of trumpets
proudly fan faring over the rumble of the timpani and rigorous slicing
of the string orchestra below for eight bars. This presages the
development of the fundamental groundwork upon which the "Ode to Joy"
and the remainder of the historic finale of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony
is based, as will be evidenced in the succeeding sonata form that
defines the scaffolding of this "Victory Symphony."

> **Part II: Sieges-Symphonie (Victory Symphony) **
>
> **Intrada**
>
> The piccolo doubles up the octave from the first flute for the first
> three bars (Bars 9 to 11 - Figure 236), but then drops down *unisono*
> until Bar 19, where it deviates slightly from the rest of the texture
> and frolics into its emblematic 'victory' trill before rocketing up a
> scale to join the rest of the group in Bar 23 (Figure 236).

![](media/image21.png){width="5.490277777777778in" height="1.65in"}

**Figure** **236: Victory Symphony Bars 6 - 26**[^33]

![](media/image22.png){width="5.490277777777778in"
height="0.6291666666666667in"}The piccolo then associates itself with
several transient motifs that build up to two dominant-seventh cadences.
The piccolo sustains the seventh of the chord with each declamation,
before it is whisked away into whirling sixteenth notes of the *dessus*
winds and strings, painting the skies with whizzing fireworks that
disperse into the most magnificent montage of a D Major chord (Bars 41
to 43 - Figure 236).

**Figure** **237: Victory Bars 41 - 47**[^34]

Over the course of a symmetrical sixteen bars to follow (Bars 43 to 59 -
Figure 237, Figure 238, Figure 239) the piccolo dances and prances at
the apex of its range in pure ecstasy in collaboration with its team
members, basking in a collective shower of grace notes, *sforzando* and
*staccato* markings adorning a grand procession along the lines of the D
Major scale.

![](media/image23.png){width="5.375in" height="0.5185181539807524in"}

**Figure** **238: Victory Bars 48 - 55**[^35]

The colorful spectacle comes to an abrupt transition into a kind of
hymnody in B-flat Major in the second subchapter of the programmatic
work, *Andante grazioso*. Rumph remarks that the material in **^3^**
"is the prototype of that famous modulation to B-flat in both symphony
and mass. Moreover, the same arresting piano and the same pizzicato
unison in the bass", refer to the abrupt transitions to B-flat major
during the *Alla Marcia* of the fourth movement Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony and *Dona Nobis Pacem* from his *Missa Solemnis.*[^36] Here,
over a *pizzicato* accompaniment in the strings, the clarinets and
bassoons amiably serenade the listener with the tune to "God Save the
King" (Bar 61 to 77 - Figure 239). However, the hymn remains unresolved
as the orchestra erupts once more into an identical reprise of the
*Allegro con brio* at Bar 78.

![](media/image24.png){width="5.518055555555556in" height="1.23125in"}

**Figure** **239: Victory Bars 56 - 83**[^37]

After a second hashing of the invigorating *Tempo primo*, the piece once
again hushes to the amorous "God Save the King" anthem, now reenacted
with the first oboe as the lead of the expanded *Harmonie* wind
instrumentation. However, an underlying paradigm of the work is
ultimately revealed, as Rumph eloquently describes

"When "God Save the King" returns in D, the hymn is interrupted by
fortissimo outbursts on the even bars from the orchestra, as the martial
energy of the Allegro invades the sanctuary of the hymn. The
Siegessinfonie thus reenacts, at the level of themes, the structural
idea of the first half: that is, two opposing forces present themselves
separately, then collide and interpenetrate. The literal battle has been
abstracted to the dialectics of sonata form...The contest between the
odd and even bars in the second statement of "God Save the King" rises
above national politics. Beethoven is evoking the state of war itself,
in contrast to the genteel refuge of the minuet. The Siegessinfonie
transcends the iconic representation of the battle, spiritualizing the
contest between French and English armies as a symbolic dialectic
between war and peace, upheaval and aristocratic stability."[^38]

During this constant juxtaposition of different affects of the *Tempo di
Menuetto moderato* (Bars 131 to 153 - Figure 240), the piccolo
independently cascades down and up thirty-second-note scales in the
dominant and tonic of D Major during the *fortissimo* conflagrations of
the section (Bars 132 to 142 - Figure 240).

![](media/image25.png){width="5.4625in" height="1.5416666666666667in"}

**Figure** **240: Victory Bars 126 - 149**[^39]

The piccolo, therefore, provides the ingredients Beethoven will once
again draw upon in a cascading effect that suspends the listener in an
*Augenblick* during the *Maestoso* four bars before the final
*Prestissimo* coda of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony (Bar 67, Page 279 of
Mini Score[^40]).

![](media/image27.png){width="5.59215113735783in"
height="0.958416447944007in"}**Figure** **241: Beethoven, Ninth
Symphony, Prestissimo Bar 67**[^41]

An exchange of three slurred ascending quarter notes from D to F-sharp
and F-sharp to A occurs between the violins and oboes -- a whiff of the
"Ode to Joy" anticipation hanging in the air. Moreover, a rare
indication of *ritardando* reins in the texture to the quiet *fermata*
of an incomplete supertonic minor-seventh chord that resolves to the
first inversion of the tonic in D Major (ii^7^ -- I^6^) on the downbeat
of the final *Allegro* coda at Bar 154.

Subtly blending the rhythmic identity of the *Marlborough* melody (Bar
158 to 160) in the opening solo passage of the first violins, the memory
of the French is given closure and is incorporated into the final
ceremony of celebration of *Wellingtons Sieg.* What is to follow is the
classic example of a double fugue between the four voices of the string
orchestra, once again paving the way for Beethoven's implementation of
the musical device in the double fugue of the Ninth Symphony's Fourth
Movement. It is also the consolidation of the gradual transformation of
Beethoven's compositional signature and embrace of conservatism and
orthodoxy, reviving the *stile antico* in his own voice and embossing
the "official stamp of the Hapsburg dynasty."[^42] The consistency of
the orchestra thickens with the gradual inclusion of various instruments
and increase in dynamics until, starting in Bar 222, the piccolo and
almost all the other winds transpire in a flash of sixteenth-note
sextuplets into the final charge of the piece (Figure 242).

![A picture containing music, brass Description generated with high
confidence](media/image28.png){width="5.457384076990376in"
height="0.5462959317585302in"}

**Figure** **242:Victory Bars 217 - 226**[^43]

In a combination of blazing runs and *sforzando* chords in
synchronization with the full force of the orchestra, the piccolo acts
upon its own accord for a final few instances from Bars 245 to 247 and
repeated from 252 to 254, whipping up an E Major arpeggio in contrast to
the stasis harmonic activity in the other voices of the orchestra
(Figure 243).

![](media/image29.png){width="4.992099737532809in"
height="1.258442694663167in"}

**Figure** **243:Victory Bars 237 - 262**[^44]

After weaving around in the modest elevation of the second octave from
Bar 272 to 290, the piccolo acts as the shining beacon atop the blocks
of *staccato* chords and arpeggios from Bar 310 to 336 that draw the
militaristic potpourri to a close and the witnessing audience of the
time to an uproar of applause (Figure 244 and Figure 245).

![](media/image30.png){width="5.48125in" height="1.225in"}

**Figure** **244: Victory Bars 263 - 305**[^45]

![](media/image31.png){width="5.48125in" height="1.6916666666666667in"}

**Figure** **245: Victory Bars 306 - 336**[^46]

> **The Panharmonikon**

The Panharmonikon was a mechanical device which could play
pre-programmed orchestral music, a kind of gigantic automatic music box
orchestra invented by Johann Nepomuk Mälzel (1776 -- 1838), and some
detail has been reconstructed from photographs. The last known example
was destroyed in the bombing of Stuttgart World War II.

The Panharmonikon was a wind and percussion machine and it's instrument
array consisted of a piccolo, four flutes, five oboes, five clarinets,
two bassoons, a contrabassoon, two horns, four trumpets, four trombones,
timpani, triangle, cymbals, a military side-drum and an orchestral
kettle drum, and an organ bass. [^47]

The Wellington Sieg composition consists entirely of Part II of the
orchestral version as Part I, had not yet been composed. Although
similar to the orchestral version, there is no string section, an
impossibility for a wind machine giving the piece a mechanical brassy
band-like texture.[^48] The horns and trumpets parts were written as
they would be heard, and not transposed as if for a live musician's
performance.

The part for the **piccolo** goes several notes lower than the range of
a modern piccolo as written by Beethoven. Transposing up an octave
results in an ending too high for a piccolo. One can assume that
Beethoven intended for the piccolo part to be played precisely as
written, the same as the horns and trumpets. However, it is unlikely
that it was written precisely as what it should sound like in the octave
placement. If that were the case, he would be continually writing the
part with numerous ledger lines above the staff, which would be
laborious and annoying, so it is more likely that Beethoven wrote the
part as the piccolo player would have played it, with the assumption
that it was in any event, going to come out an octave higher.[^49]

![](media/image32.jpeg){width="2.2861023622047245in"
height="2.095138888888889in"}The Panharmonikon version differs in some
respect from the orchestral version. For example, the Allegro con brio
is repeated after the first \'God Save the King\' in the orchestral
version, as a literal repeat throughout. However, Beethoven deviates
from that literal repeat in bars 92-102 in the Panharmonikon version
having different harmonies and therefore this difference sounds unusual.
Leading to the coda at bar 211 is found the big scale and another
example, whereby it was changed to a diatonic scale in the orchestral
version, wherein the scale is chromatic in the earlier Panharmonikon
version.[^50]

![](media/image33.jpg){width="1.9644903762029746in"
height="2.095138888888889in"}![](media/image34.jpg){width="1.9951388888888888in"
height="2.095138888888889in"}

**Figure** **246:Panharmonikon left, detail of drums, pin barrels
controlling the Panharmonikon** [^51]**^,^**[^52]

> **Summary**

Premiered alongside his Seventh Symphony on December 8, 1813,[^53]
*Wellingtons Sieg* is a composition whose name does not bear the
household status of Beethoven's other orchestral works, namely his Fifth
and Ninth Symphonies. However, contemporaneously this programmatic work
marked the absolute pinnacle of Beethoven's successes in Vienna and
elevated him both lucratively and socially to almost elite status. It
also denoted a temporary period in the composer's approach to writing
music; whether to the detriment of Beethoven and the quality of his work
has remained the focal point of a heated debate among his critics and
advocates since its reception.

[^1]: A ratchet, also called a noisemaker or Knarre (German) "is an
    orchestral musical instrument played by percussionists. Operating on
    the principle of the ratchet device, a gearwheel and a stiff board
    are mounted on a handle, which rotates freely. The player holds the
    handle and swings the whole mechanism around. The momentum makes the
    board click against the gearwheel, producing a clicking and rattling
    noise. A popular design consists of a thick wooden cog wheel
    attached to a handle and two wooden flanges that alternately hit the
    teeth of the cog when the handle turns." Karl Peinkofer and Fritz
    Tannigel, Handbook of Percussion Instruments, (Mainz, Germany:
    Schott, 1976), pp. 152-153.

[^2]: Panharmonikon, Wikipedia;
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panharmonicon

[^3]: Beethoven. Original score for Panharmonikon. Holograph manuscript,
    1813, Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin (D-B): Mus.ms.autogr. Beethoven, L.
    v., Artaria 181, Version for Panharmonikon IMSLP:
    https://imslp.org/wiki/Special:ImagefromIndex/513525/hfpb, accessed
    03302019

[^4]: Beethoven's Letters, Volume 1: 127. "Deposition":
    [http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13065/13065-h/13065-h.htm]{.underline}

[^5]: Ibid. 116. "Letter of Thanks":
    http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13065/13065-h/13065-h.htm

[^6]: Ibid. 127. "Deposition"; 129. "Address and Appeal to London
    Artists by L. van Beethoven":
    [http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13065/13065-h/13065-h.htm]{.underline}

[^7]: "Battle Symphony" Groves Reference:
    http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780199578108.001.0001/acref-9780199578108-e-846?fromCrossSearch=true

[^8]: Frederick Niecks*. Programme Music in the Last Four Centuries. A
    Contribution to the History of Musical Expression*,Novello, London,
    1906, p. 115.

[^9]: Ibid., Niecks, p. 115.

[^10]: Battle of Vitoria, Britannica:
    [https://www.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Vitoria]{.underline}

[^11]: Potboiler: a book, painting, or recording produced merely to make
    the writer or artist a living by catering to popular taste.

[^12]: First Edition, Vienna: S.A. Steiner & Co., n.d. (1815). Plate
    2367

[^13]: Kevin McMahon. Music Director and Conductor, Symphony Orchestra,
    Sheboygan, November 2012 Program Notes;
    http://sheboygansymphony.org/concerts/program-notes/november-2012-program-notes/

[^14]: Rumph, Stephen C. *Beethoven after Napoleon: Political
    Romanticism in the Late Works.* London: University of California
    Press. pp. 187-88

[^15]: Ibid. p. 187

[^16]: IMSLP: Wellingtons Sieg, Op.91 (Beethoven, Ludwig van). Part 1:
    Schlacht. Ludwig van Beethovens Werke, Serie 2: Orchester-Werke,
    Nr.10. p. 1.

    Leipzig: Breitkopf und Härtel, 1862. Plate B.10.

[^17]: Op. cit., IMSLP, Schlacht, p. 2.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 176.

[^19]: Op. cit., IMSLP, Marlborough, p. 3.

[^20]: Ibid., IMSLP, pp. 4 -- 6.

[^21]: Ibid., IMSLP, p 7.

[^22]: Op. cit., IMSLP, Schlacht, p. 11.

[^23]: Ibid., IMSLP, Schlacht, p. 12, 13.

[^24]: Ibid., IMSLP, Schlacht, p. 14.

[^25]: Ibid., IMSLP, Schlacht, p. 14.

[^26]: IMSLP: Wellingtons Sieg, Op.91 (Beethoven, Ludwig van). Part:
    Sturm. Ludwig van Beethovens Werke, Serie 2: Orchester-Werke; p. 25;
    https://imslp.org/wiki/Wellingtons\_Sieg,\_Op.91\_(Beethoven,\_Ludwig\_van)

[^27]: Ibid., Sturm, p. 28.

[^28]: Oriental Proverb: quotes from 1799 in The Scots Magazine or
    General Repository of Literature, History, And Politics, vol XVI,
    Alex Chapman and Co., Edinburgh, 1799; Google Books:
    https://books.google.com/books?id=h9cPAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA245&dq=%22last+straw%22\#v=onepage&q=%22last%20straw%22&f=false

[^29]: Ibid., Sturm, p. 29.

[^30]: Ibid., Sturm, p. 31.

[^31]: Ibid., Sturm, pp. 35, 36.

[^32]: Ibid., Sturm, p. 38.

[^33]: IMSLP: Wellingtons Sieg, Op.91 (Beethoven, Ludwig van). Part:
    Sturm. Ludwig van Beethovens Werke, Serie 2: Orchester-Werke; pp.
    2-4;
    https://imslp.org/wiki/Wellingtons\_Sieg,\_Op.91\_(Beethoven,\_Ludwig\_van)

[^34]: Ibid., Victory, p. 7.

[^35]: Ibid., Victory, p. 8.

[^36]: Op. cit. Rumph, p. 176

[^37]: Op.cit., Victory, pp. 9,11.

[^38]: Ibid., Rumph, p. 177-78.

[^39]: Op. cit., Victory, pp. 18 -- 20.

[^40]: The Nine Symphonies of Beethoven in Score (Mini Score). Albert E.
    Weir, Bonanza Books, New York, 1935, p. 350.

[^41]: Ibid., The Nine Symphonies of Beethoven in Score. p. 350.

[^42]: Ibid., Rumph, p. 99

[^43]: Op. cit., Victory, p. 27.

[^44]: Ibid., Victory, pp. 29,30.

[^45]: Ibid., Victory, pp. 31 -- 33.

[^46]: Ibid., Victory, pp. 34,35.

[^47]: Mark S. Zimmer, Willem Xickx, Wellington\'s Victory, The Battle
    of Vittoria, First Version for Panharmonikon (1813), The Unheard
    Beethoven;
    https://unheardbeethoven.org/search.php?Identifier=hess108

[^48]: Ibid., recreated on a Midi file: "We have endeavored to make the
    MIDI file as mechanical as possible, to simulate the mechanical
    operations of the Panharmonikon, and have not used our ordinary
    humanizing algorithms on this composition."

[^49]: Personal opinion.

[^50]: Op. cit., Wellington\'s Victory, The Battle of Vittoria, First
    Version for Panharmonikon (1813), The Unheard Beethoven,

[^51]: Pianola.org;
    http://www.pianola.org/history/history\_orchestrions.cfm

[^52]: Mazzola, Guerino, Elements of music informatics, Berhauser
    (2006), *Interaction of composition and technology*,
    http://www.encyclospace.org/Musikinformatik\_1/Kapitel\_1.html

[^53]: Ludwig van Beethoven Grove:
    [http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/grovemusic/view/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.001.0001/omo-9781561592630-e-0000040026?mediaType=Article]{.underline}
